SECTION 1
Questions 1-10
Complete the form below.

Write ONE WORD AND/OR A NUMBER for each answer.



CRIME REPORT FORM


Type of crime:             theft

Personal information

Example

Name                    Louise …Taylor…

Nationality           1 ……………….

Date of birth        14 December 1977

Occupation           interior designer

Reason for visit    business (to buy antique 2………………)

Length of stay       two months

Current address    3 ………………. Apartments (No 15)

Details of theft

Items stolen         – a wallet containing approximately 4 £ …………….

                               – a 5 ………………

Date of theft         6 ………………

Possible time and place of theft

Location                    outside the 7…………… at about 4 pm

Details of suspect    – some boys asked for the 8……………. then ran off

                                    – one had a T-shirt with a picture of a tiger

                                    – he was about 12, slim build with 9…………… hair

Crime reference number allocated

                                  10…………….

SECTION 2
Induction talk for new apprentices
Questions 11 and 12
Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO pieces of advice for the first week of an apprenticeship does the manager give?

A     get to know colleagues

B     learn from any mistakes

C     ask lots of questions

D     react positively to feedback

E     enjoy new challenges

Questions 13 and 14
Choose TWO letters, A-E.

Which TWO things does the manager say mentors can help with?

A     confidence-building

B     making career plans

C     completing difficult tasks

D     making a weekly timetable

E     reviewing progress

Questions 15-20
What does the manager say about each of the following aspects of the company policy for apprentices?

Write the correct letter, A, B or C, next to Questions 15-20.

A     It is encouraged.

B     There are some restrictions.

C     It is against the rules.

Company policy for apprentices

15   Using the internet          …………….

16   Flexible working              …………….

17   Booking holidays            …………….

18   Working overtime           …………….

19   Wearing trainers             …………….

20   Bringing food to work    …………….
SECTION 3
Questions 21-25
Choose the correct letter, A, B or C.

Cities built by the sea

21   Carla and Rob were surprised to learn that coastal cities

A   contain nearly half the world’s population.

B   include most of the world’s largest cities.

C   are growing twice as fast as other cities.


22   According to Rob, building coastal cities near to rivers

A   may bring pollution to the cities.

B   may reduce the land available for agriculture.

C   may mean the countryside is spoiled by industry.


23   What mistake was made when building water drainage channels in Miami in the 1950s?

A   There were not enough for them.

B   They were made of unsuitable materials.

C   They did not allow for the effects of climate change.


24   What do Rob and Carla think that the authorities in Miami should do immediately?

A   take measures to restore ecosystems

B   pay for a new flood prevention system

C   stop disposing of waste materials into the ocean
25   What do they agree should be the priority for international action?

A   greater coordination of activities

B   more sharing of information

C   agreement on shared policies

Questions 26-30
What decision do the students make about each of the following parts of their presentation?

Choose FIVE answers from the box and write the correct letter, A-G, next to Questions 26-30.

Decisions

A     use visuals

B     keep it short

C     involve other students

D     check the information is accurate

E     provide a handout

F     focus on one example

G     do online research

Parts of the presentation

26   Historical background          ……………..

27   Geographical factors            ……………..

28   Past mistakes                         ……………..

29   Future risks                             ……………..

30   International implications    ……………..
SECTION 4
Questions 31-40
Complete the notes below.

Write ONE WORD ONLY for each answer.

Marine renewable energy (ocean energy)

Introduction

More energy required because of growth in population and 31…………………..

What’s needed:

●   renewable energy sources

●   methods that won’t create pollution

Wave energy

Advantage: waves provide a 32………………… source of renewable energy

Electricity can be generated using offshore or onshore systems

Onshore systems may use a reservoir

Problems:

●   waves can move in any 33…………………..

●   movement of sand, etc. on the 34…………………… of the ocean may be affected

Tidal energy

Tides are more 35…………………. than waves

Planned tidal lagoon in Wales:

●   will be created in a 36…………………. at Swansea

●   breakwater (dam) containing 16 turbines

●   rising tide forces water through turbines, generating electricity

●   stored water is released through 37………………….., driving the turbines in the reverse direction

Advantages:

●   not dependent on weather

●   no 38…………………… is required to make it work

●   likely to create a number of 39…………………..

Problem:

●   may ham fish and birds, e.g. by affecting 40…………………. and building up silt

Ocean thermal energy conversion

Uses a difference in temperature between the surface and lower levels

Water brought to the surface in a pipe                                  